>> In the past, leading up to
now, we saw diabetes, obesity,
heart disease as the leading
killers in Western society.
And now they're predicting that
anxiety, depression, and anger,
the mental diseases
are going to be causing
a lot of illnesses and deaths.
>> Being a physician, I
really understand that many
of the conditions that are
prevalent in our society are
stress related.
Stress is a huge component.
And it's not something
that modern medicine really
has very efficient
tools to work with.
Contrast that with
Ayurveda, Ayurveda
understands this
intimate connection
between mind and body.
It understands how emotions
and emotional perception
and the digestion of emotion
has an impact on our ability
to either ward off stress,
to process it, digest it,
and not have it affect us, or
it will have an impact that
is damaging and imbalancing.
>> Collectively, we are
experiencing a time of great
stress, of environmental
pollutions, of toxins,
of energetic pollution.
We have WIFI around
us all the time.
We have toxins in our food.
And Ayurveda provides
so many tools for us
to sooth, to calm, to
come back into balance,
and to not create
barriers between us
and others, us and
the external world,
but, yet, to maintain ourselves
and to invite in harmony while
still being in the world.
>> We need to take into account,
like, what are we watching?
How are we taking
in information?
Through these beautiful
five sense organs.
You know this is
[NON-ENGLISH] yoga.
This is one of the
causes of disease.
Associations with negative
things from the outside world,
bringing them into
the body, things
that are not beneficial to
our beautiful mental state,
such as bad sounds, sights,
watching violent things
in film or television.
We want to make sure that all
of the things we're bringing
into our external environment
are creating a beautiful place
within ourselves.
>> So we don't remove
ourselves from the world,
we thrive in the
world where we are.
>> Heart disease is so common.
Why?
Because of stress, eating
habits, fast foods,
processed foods, not eating
in the rhythm of the nature,
not getting good sleep,
overly using your senses.
All of these contributions
to manifesting heart disease
or cancer.
And emotional impressions
that are deeply embedded,
which we ignore, we have to
address them and let them go.
Our emotions are balanced
when we are positive,
when we are happy, and
we look forward to life.
But if we have an imbalanced
state of emotions, what is it?
Either you're
angry, you're hurt,
or you've experienced
some trauma.
In Ayurveda, we have to process
and sit with those emotions
and actually go through
them and analyze them.
The use of talk therapy,
the use of healthy diet
that can help you change
your thinking into
positive and
rational, and the use
of herbs that is recommended for
whatever you're going through,
there is a lot of support in
getting your mental balance
back through Ayurveda.
Vitality in Ayurveda
is called prana.
So when we are depleted
in our vitality,
we just cannot
function properly.
We experience symptoms like
fatigue, lack of energy, sleep,
and just not motivated
to do anything.
Well, I don't see you
do have a lot of toxins
in your large intestine.
As an Ayurveda doctor and
a mental health counselor,
I can tell you
Ayurvedic psychology
plays a very
important role in how
I approach mental
health counseling
in my private practice.
Tell me about your sleep?
>> My sleep?
>> Yes.
>> Well, it could
probably be better.
>> Ayurveda defines the
imbalances of our mind
and emotions, especially when
we look at the vata imbalance,
it causing anxiety.
And the pitta imbalance
causing anger.
And the kapha imbalance
causing depression.
>> We can talk about having
physical ama which will be
undigested food in
the digestive tract.
And it creates chronic
illness and chronic pain.
Likewise, we can also
have undigested emotion.
And that will cause
us a lot of pain
as we repress those emotions.
We don't deal with
those emotions.
We can have undigested stress.
We can have undigested thought.
So, while we want to take
measures to strengthen
our physical
digestion, we also want
to take measures to
strengthen emotional digestion
and mental digestion.
>> When we are
digesting emotion,
what comes out in the
end is liveliness.
When we're struggling with
emotion, what comes out
is stress.
And so understanding digestion
doesn't just apply to food.
It applies to emotion.
It applies to everything that
we take in through the senses.
All of life gets metabolized.
And if we're able to do
that efficiently, if we're
able to do that thoroughly,
then we have vibrancy.
If not, then we have stress
and stress related disease.
>> The way to boost our
vitality or our prana,
we can do that by getting the
right amount of sleep every day
and by eating healthy foods,
and also by being in sync with
nature.
That's very important.
Waking up early
morning and meditating.
In Ayurveda, we look at
five different bodies--
physical body, the mental
body, the emotional body,
and the spiritual body, and,
of course, the breath body.
So if we hit all these
bodies every day,
we're going to feel
really energized.
>> Oftentimes, I have clients
coming to me for weight loss,
in particular.
Many people in the world
are experiencing a lot
of heaviness in their body.
And one of the first things
that I'll talk to them about
is whether there is an emotional
component to why their body is
retaining weight--
to stay grounded, to stay
stable, to stay powerful.
I could put them on any diet and
that weight usually won't go.
>> Especially, if you're
eating when you're stressed,
your cortisone levels are
very high in your body.
And when you're stressed,
you're eating, it causes what?
Emotional eating.
You're going to eat
what kind of foods?
More sugar, more carbs, you
know, and drink more caffeine
to calm yourself down.
And that is going
to throw you off.
And we do that mindlessly.
And that is not good
for our vitality.
>> Really, we need to understand
the emotional causes in that
weight retention.
So we need to look at when the
weight began to accumulate, why
it's there, and how
that weight might
be serving that individual.
And then we need
to create harmony
so that there is no
longer a reason for them
to be retaining that weight.
And then the weight
goes so easily.
>> I understand that these
days we are very busy.
And we have to optimize the
time we have and how we eat.
And the digestion
starts in your mouth.
The enzyme's produce
in your saliva.
It is broken down and then the
hydrochloric acid takes over
and the food is digested.
The food in the stomach can
only stay for some time.
So we have to make
sure that when we eat,
we have to pay attention and
make sure that the food is
completely digested.
And no matter what, it's
going to take it's time.
You cannot rush anything.
If you are eating in
that rushed, hurried way
and just gobbling up your
food, and you are really
not secreting the juices and
giving it time to digest,
the food is going
to pass through
without being digested properly.
And it is going to form what
we call ama in Ayurveda.
That is toxins.
And those toxins are going
to be absorbed in our system
and manifest in the form
of discomfort or disease.
That is why these days you
see a lot of imbalances.
Not mindful about
these routines is
making us more sick than ever.
>> Just imagine
that a cup of water,
if you keep filling that cup
of water and you drink it,
it's empty.
But then if you keep on
filling that cup of water,
it overflows.
That overflowing of water is
the imbalance in your doshas.
As long as it is contained,
then you're in balance.
Say, you are a vata
constitution person.
You have a tendency to suffer
with nervous disorders.
And emotionally,
you're prone to anxiety
if you have a vata imbalance.
But if you're a pitta
constitution person,
you are prone to
metabolic disorders.
And the pitta imbalance
causing anger.
And then if you're the kapha
constitution, emotionally.
You're prone to depression.
The Ayurvedic psychological
models of treatment
are threefold-- the
Daivavyapasharaya,
the Yuktivyapashraya,
and the Sattvavajaya.
The Daivavyapasharaya
treatment relates
to the divine interventions--
with prayers, mantras,
yantras, and Tantra.
Those are passive approaches.
And the Yuktivyapashraya
is with the use
of herbs and other balancing
lifestyle approaches.
And the Sattvavajaya treatment
is the counseling piece.
For you, I would
also recommend you
doing a sort of like an
alternate nostril breathing.
>> Yes.
>> And it works beautifully
with balancing the doshas
and bringing them to a state
where they can actually
function normally.
>> So if we think about
that, how will that translate
to the physiology and
to the nervous system?
>> For example, if there
is a traumatic experience,
each one of us react or
respond to it differently.
There are some people
who are very sensitive
and have less
tolerance to trauma.
And they're affected more.
But then there are some people
it does not bother them.
There is a trauma, yes, and
what just happened is not good.
There is empathy.
But then that does not
affect them to produce any
psychosomatic diseases that they
cannot function in this world.
Some easy tips that you
can do to help yourself
when you're upset, or
when you're disturbed,
or when you're worried, is
to just sit with yourself
and breathe.
Watch how you're breathing.
You will notice
when you're going
through these type of
emotions, your breath
becomes shallow And?
The types of thoughts
you're engaged in.
Take a break.
Break the circuit.
Create that space between
you and your thoughts.
And anchor yourself
with your breath.
When you do that every day
for about even 10 minutes,
there is a big difference.
If you have to go to work,
you cannot find time,
sit in your car in the
parking lot and do it.
You will be only
with yourself there.
Get into that quiet space.
First, before you
go, you're going
to feel a whole lot better.
>> So we're always looking at
the relative state of imbalance
in the body and trying to apply
measures that will bring us
into greater balance
and greater harmony.
>> What I have found, from
someone who's experienced
periods of depression, somebody
who has experienced periods
of anxiety, when I'm on
my self-care practices,
when I'm doing my meditation,
when I'm being physical
in my body, I'm not dropping
into these anxiety states,
into these states of depression,
when I'm making really good
choices about what I'm
eating, when I'm eating it.
>> Weight loss diets,
anything that is processed,
anything that does not come
naturally is definitely not
good for anybody.
That's how we accumulate toxins.
When we are unconscious
and blind to just being
attracted to the
advertisements, that's
how we lose connection
with the source.
If we start to
listen to ourselves
and listen to our
body and actually
take some time
mindfully to even see
what is in that food that
is being packaged so well
and sold to you,
even a few minutes
will make a huge difference.
When a client comes to me, all
I have to do is look at them
and their constitution and
everything just opens up just
like that.
They don't even have
to tell me everything.
The same thing applies to
our mental health also.
When a person is
suffering from anxiety,
their air and space
element is very high.
They are spacey.
And their thought
processes are running wild.
And they cannot focus.
So what we need to
do with those clients
is to help them with more
approaches that can calm them
down, which involves the
water and the earth element,
which means grounding.
Normally, with anxiety, the
sympathetic nervous system
is hyperactive.
So in our body, we
have a nervous system.
And the nervous
system comprises of
the sympathetic and
parasympathetic.
So the sympathetic nervous
system is when we think a lot
and we use our brain
to do activities,
to read, to study, to work.
And our parasympathetic
nervous system
is when we are in our body,
when blood circulation needs
to go internally.
So our food, when we
eat, is digested properly
and the enzymes are
secreted properly
for wholesome digestion.
>> Well, Ayurveda has several
different levels on which
it's able to work with stress.
First, on the level
of meditation,
which, in Ayurvedic terms, is
connecting directly to source.
That deep connection
is something
that gives us strength.
It gives us ojas, the ability
to have life force, the ability
to resist the impact of stress.
It is also something
that allows us
to release the egoic
patterning that
can serve as frequent triggers
for stressful reactions.
>> Meditation, really good for
the ama because what meditation
does is it helps to constantly
re-entrain the nervous system
to a more parasympathetic state
into a state where we're not
focused on stressors, where
we're not allowing external
influences to radically change
the way which we feel inside.
A lot of ama or blockage in
the flow begins energetically.
So if we're fine tuning
with yogic and meditation
techniques, if we're fine tuning
our inner corner frequency,
meaning our nervous system
and the state of the mind,
being able to shed and
release emotions that are not
beneficial for us, and then
tune in with proper diet,
you know, these
three things help
to regulate ama production in
the body and proper disposal
of all of it.
>> The state of bliss
is a state of truth.
It's not just an overlayering
of fast positivity or grasping
of happiness.
It's when experience
and emotion and food
is all metabolized and digested.
>> And as you can more into
tune with the natural rhythms
of what your body needs, and
finding beautiful places inside
of yourself, learning how to
properly process your emotions
and speak out what you need
to speak to feel heard,
this brings a lot of
fulfillment in your life.
And in that fulfillment,
we can really
embody ourself and our
duty in this world.
>> Via Ayurveda, we don't
separate ourselves from
the world.
We don't encapsulate
ourselves in a little bubble
to protect ourselves from
environmental pollution.
We, instead,
strengthen ourselves.
We strengthen our
nervous system.
We take measures to
ground and soothe.
And then we integrate
into the world,
so we can thrive and blossom
exactly where we are.
>> Don't forget to explore the
rest of this series by watching
our docuseries, yoga
practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.